0.3 is here!
############

:date: 2024-08-02 10:00:00
:category: Release
:summary: Cubos 0.3 Release!

.. role:: dim
    :class: m-text m-dim

New 0.3 Features
================

On this release, we focused on adding essential features we've been wanting to have for quite some time now.
It ended up being a tad smaller than expected, as we spent a lot of time working on non-code related stuff, such as rebranding the project.
**TODO: should we introduce the rebranding here?**

This blog post covers the most important changes, but you can check out the full changelog in our `repository <https://github.com/GameDevTecnico/cubos/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md>`_.

On the Editor
-------------

Console Plugin :dim:`(@Scarface1809)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TODO: describe changes, add a screenshot

On the Engine
-------------

A New Physics Solver :dim:`(@fallenatlas)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TODO: describe changes, maybe a screenshot too?


Friction and Bounciness :dim:`(@fallenatlas)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TODO: should this be a separate entry?

Raycasting :dim:`(@diogomsmiranda)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TODO: describe changes, show code sample

Spot Light Shadows :dim:`(@tomas7770)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TODO: describe changes, add a screenshot

Initial UI Plugin :dim:`(@DiogoMendonc-a)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TODO: describe changes, add screenshots, maybe gifs too?

Arbitrary Input Combinations for Actions and Axes :dim:`(@luishfonseca)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TODO: describe changes, show input bindings example

TODO: describe changes, add screenshots, maybe gifs too?

On the Core
-----------

Metrics :dim:`(@roby2014)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We are excited to introduce the new metrics and profiling utilities! 
This started becoming a priority since we detected lots of performance issues in the last Game Jam we participated.

These tools are designed to help track performance and gather valuable insights about code execution and data.

How it looks:

.. code-block:: cpp

    static void compute()
    {
        CUBOS_PROFILE();
        // ...
    } // after the scope ends, a new metric `compute` will be added, with the duration of this scope

    static void myFunction() 
    {
        /// simulate profiling loop
        for (int i = 0; i < 1337; ++i)
        {
            // simulate frame by calling a function that does work..
            compute();

            // register some metrics, this could be FPS, entities count, ....
            CUBOS_METRIC("count", i);
        }
    }

Currently, metrics can be accessed manually through the singleton class. However, we plan to 
integrate these metrics into our editor for a more streamlined experience.

Learn more about it on our `documentation <https://docs.cubosengine.org/examples-core-metrics.html>`_ : 

Networking Utilities :dim:`(@roby2014)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the 0.3 release, Cubos finally has networking! This is a big step forward for our engine, bringing 
powerful networking utilities such as ` Address <https://docs.cubosengine.org/classcubos_1_1core_1_1net_1_1Address.html>`_, 
`UdpSocket <https://docs.cubosengine.org/classcubos_1_1core_1_1net_1_1UdpSocket.html>`_, `TcpListener <https://docs.cubosengine.org/classcubos_1_1core_1_1net_1_1TcpListener.html>`_, 
and `TcpStream <https://docs.cubosengine.org/classcubos_1_1core_1_1net_1_1TcpStream.html>`_. 

Creating an UDP client and sending a message is as simple as:

.. code-block:: cpp

    UdpSocket client;
    client.bind(8080, Address::LocalHost);
    
    const char* msg = "Hello, I'm a Cubos UDP client!";
    client.send(msg, std::strlen(msg), Address::from("server.com"), 8081))

Learn more about it on our `documentation <https://docs.cubosengine.org/examples-core-networking.html>`_ : 

Groundwork for a Standalone Editor :dim:`(@RiscadoA)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TODO: describe changes

Next Steps
==========

**TODO: I just copied this from the previous post, we should rewrite it:**
We're very happy with the progress we've made on this release. The engine is becoming more and more powerful, and we were able to create a full game with it in a week!

For the next release, which should be out in September, we'll be **WIP**

* A **standalone editor application**. Our tools are currently integrated into the games themselves which is not ideal.
* **Audio support**, as there's no sound at all in the engine right now.
* Actual **voxel collisions**, as we currently only check the bounding boxes.
* Basic **rigidbody physics**, with rotation and friction.
* **Shadows** for all light types.
* **Web-support**, so that games can be played in the browser.
* **Tracing and spans**, for better tracking of program execution.
* **TODO: what else? review stuff above too**

You can check out the full list of stuff we want to get done in the `milestone <https://github.com/GameDevTecnico/cubos/milestone/27>`_ for the next release.

We're currently a team of 13 people, and **we're looking to expand**! If you're interested in joining us, or just want to learn more about the project, join our `Discord server <https://discord.gg/WjTtcNTRqD>`_!
